This book of the law should not depart from your mouth,
and you must read it in an undertone day and night
in order to observe carefully all that is written in it,
for then your way will be successful,
and then you will act wisely.
The Bible is enjoyed in many different formats,
one of which is the audio edition of the New World Translation.
Good news, according to Matthew.
But how is it produced?
Let's take a closer look.
When we first heard that the governing body wanted
to record the revised edition of the New World Translation,
I think all of us knew that it was going to be a big job.
The narrator is one voice,
and all the other characters are a different voice.
It's not a dramatic Bible reading,
but it's a reading with a high level of realism.
There's no music, no sound effects, just voices.
We were surprised to find out how many characters
there were in the Bible. Well, the Bible is a really big book.
I don't think any of us realized how big of a job it would be.
This is not a little project. This is huge.
The research really is one of the items
that are a very fundamental basic.
They are very important to get effects together.
Bible is true life,
but it's what really happened to real people.
We had to break down who the voices were.
And then we had to give each character a unique name
to identify him. If he's not named in the Bible,
we have to just give them descriptions
that are in the context like third Jew or first in the crowd.
We're given a room, a fair-sized room,
and we used it to make a list of all of the characters
in all four gospels.
We began with a book of Matthew,
and we had to determine the parallel accounts
between the different gospel writers.
You'll have to use the same voice for a character.
If he appears in one book,
he needs to be the same character in the other books.
Like in Matthew 21,
we have this report where Matthew simply says,
well, the disciples said the victory has with it.
But who are the disciples?
Did they all say it at the same time?
So if you check in Mark, for example,
Mark is very specific. He says,
Peter said the victory has with it.
The art department took those maps and charts in the appendix
and blew them up into poster size for us
as we were deciding who said what and where they were
and how to name the characters.
It was very helpful to have that.
That gets put into a database what kind of attributes
they have age, where they were from,
what kind of traits they were expressing in their quotations.
When the Bible talks about Jehovah speaking,
well, was it really Jehovah himself who spoke?
Well, something we know that at least at three occasions
it was Jehovah who spoke. This was when Jesus was on earth.
We compiled most of the research
and then it was forwarded on to writing research.
We have a large library here in Bethel
that is focusing especially on biblical subjects.
And we are using this quite a bit
because we need to make sure that what we say is solid.
We are people for Jehovah
and everything we say is based on the Bible.
We don't want to read too much into Bible accounts
and we don't want to read it in a way that steers incorrectly.
To start with, who's in Bethel?
We have an audition bank here in an audio video.
We poured through hundreds of auditions.
We had a brother from Africa.
We audition over the internet.
He's sitting there reading into a mic.
I'm watching him.
By the time we tallied all of the characters
for the entire Bible, we realized we had about a thousand characters.
So, a thousand voices that will need to find
there was a reading seminar at which we were taught
every aspect of reading.
And that was very effective because
it reminded us of a lot of things
dos and don'ts for effective reading.
It really gave me the confidence and understanding
that but I think I can do this.
Some of the roles are very small.
Those short, very short passages
those one sentence lines that we would call a person in for
were some of the hardest to coach.
When I initially was asked to participate
in the Bible reading, I was so excited.
And then I thought it was one line
and I thought, okay, well, it won't be too bad.
It'll be easy.
And then so I listened to the Bible reading seminar
and really helped me to take it more seriously.
We would even ask the readers to study this over.
You only have one sentence, but study all about this character.
I read the chapter.
I read the insight book and I realized that
this is more than just saying one line.
What we have found is that it's a good idea
to provide the reader with a script that has been customized.
I have the word written out phonetically
so that you know better how to pronounce it.
I would say Solomon.
Solomon, who's he?
That kind of thing.
So anyway, they help you pronounce Solomon.
And they were very careful to make
the pronunciation was accurate
and it would be consistent and accurate
all the way through the Bible reading
from begin to end.
So when the character comes in, we try to help them
to kind of think about the context.
Of course, they've already done that
in their own research and practice.
But a little bit more about maybe the motive
of the character.
How would they have felt in this particular instance?
How would they say this line?
But we also want to make sure
the brothers and sisters feel really comfortable.
And it often takes a long time to get them to relax.
In the control room,
there are basically three roles and the reader.
The follower is responsible to make sure
that all of the content is there,
to make sure that no words are missing.
During the recording, the audio engineer
is listening for anything that will distract the listeners,
stomach noises, or a shirt noise,
if the brother's wearing suspenders.
The coach is responsible for the quality of teaching.
By love watching the coach try to get the right emotion
out of the reader.
So then you might read a line and he'll say,
can you say that again with a smile?
And it's amazing because then it sounds more joyful.
And then once you capture the emotion,
then it naturally comes out.
You're not trying to copy what he's told you to say.
What we have usually a person do is start with one emotion
that you're sad,
and then add each emotion on top
that ends up getting a very complex delivery
of a line.
There's so many possible ways to say one line.
I didn't even realize how many.
You think you know how the character said it
and then the coach will give you a suggestion.
So the editing process actually begins during the recording.
And then when we get done recording,
perhaps a chapter will take down the best takes of every verse
because the reader and the coach can then listen back
and see, okay, do we like how it sounds?
We use professional software to do the editing.
And that means we do all the spacing that's needed.
We pull in all the characters for a specific chapter
because we record each voice individually.
It's not a group of people around the microphone
having the conversation.
So each character is done.
And then if there's multiple voices in a chapter,
then we pull them all together.
Once we started editing together these chapters,
beautiful artwork of truth
as you're seeing like the context, jump, jump out
and for us to then feel it and move us as, you know,
the reader of God's Word, a hero of God's Word.
The comment I've heard over and over again is
it's brought the Bible to life in my mind and heart.
And it has encouraged us to meditate deeper into God's Word.
Having the different characters read the voices
is going to be such a comfort to all of us.
I think that this is really going to make Bible reading exciting.
So now the Bible is alive and what a difference it makes.
I think they're going to love it.